contract audit proposal (#168)
global-synchronizer-foundation/cips: cip-xxxx-contract-audit/cip-xxxx-contract-audit.md

Reviewer: I'm unclear on what should be contained in `evidence_url` and am worried that it may be redundant on what is already present in `findings.description`

Reviewer: This is unclear and could be redundant with what is already present in the report.

```markdown
## Security Audits

This package has been validated by the following security auditors:

| Version | Auditor | Date | Status | Report |
|---------|---------|------|--------|--------|
| 1.0.0 | SecurityAuditorCompany | 2026-02-20 | ✓ Passed | [Audit Report](https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports/blob/main/reports/app-provider-name/1.0.0/audit-report.json) |
| 1.1.0 | SecurityAuditorCompany | 2026-02-26 | ✓ Passed | [Audit Report](https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports/blob/main/reports/app-provider-name/1.1.0/audit-report.json) |
| 1.1.0 | AnotherAuditor | 2026-02-25 | ✓ Passed | [Audit Report](https://github.com/another-auditor/audits/blob/main/reports/app-provider/1.1.0/audit.json) |

**Note**: Audits are valid for one year from the date of issue.
```

### Component 2: Audit Request Protocol

#### Audit Request Format

When AppProviders request an audit, they provide the following information:

```json
{
  "schema_version": "1.0",
  "request_id": "uuid-v4-identifier",
  "request_timestamp": "2026-02-27T00:00:00Z",
  "app_provider": {
    "name": "string",
    "email": "string",
    "organization": "string",
    "repository_url": "https://github.com/org/repo"
  },

>   "package_information": {

Reviewer: The CIP appears to strongly bind audits to exact package hashes/package IDs. How are minor or operationally trivial upgrades expected to be handled for live Featured Apps? For example, adding a read-only function would still produce a new package hash and invalidate the existing audit linkage. Is a full re-audit expected for every package change, or should the standard support lighter-weight mechanisms such as delta reviews, audit extensions, or auditor attestations that a previous audit substantially still applies?

Reviewer 2: Right now, a basic audit needs to be done on every change to a package, as each of them could in principle introduce a choice that abuses an existing delegation of a user's authority.

I would expect that audit though to be done in a delta form of new sources against the previously audited sources.

    "review_hours_spent": 45,
    "audit_scope": [
      "authorization_logic",
      "party_confidentiality",
      "contract_integrity",
      "dependency_safety",
      "daml_best_practices"
    ]
  },
  "overall_assessment": {
    "status": "passed|conditionally_passed|failed",
    "severity_rating": "none|low|medium|high|critical",
    "summary": "string",
    "recommendation": "recommended_for_production|acceptable_with_caveats|not_recommended"
  },
  "findings": [
    {
      "finding_id": "F001",
      "category": "authorization|confidentiality|integrity|dependency|best_practice|performance",
      "severity": "critical|high|medium|low|informational",
      "title": "string",
      "description": "string",
      "affected_components": [
        {
          "module": "App.Security.Authorization",
          "location": "line 42-58",
          "code_hash": "hex-encoded-hash"
        }
      ],
      "risk_assessment": "string",
      "remediation": "string",
      "remediation_status": "open|in_progress|resolved|accepted_risk",
      "evidence_url": "https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports/blob/main/reports/app-provider/1.0.0/evidence/finding-F001.md"
    }
  ],

>   "positives": [

Reviewer: This feels like a new ask of audit firms that is not normally incorporated into our existing audit processes. I anticipate it being left empty by most firms as it produces overhead to report delivery.

That being said in my experience any positives regarding a specific project would be mentioned in the executive summary of the report.

    {
      "positive_id": "P001",
      "category": "security|best_practice|design|performance",
      "title": "string",
      "description": "string",
      "components_involved": ["module_name"]
    }
  ],
  "dependency_analysis": {
    "total_dependencies": 5,

>     "dependencies_reviewed": [

Reviewer: It may help to clarify what is meant by dependency statuses. In practice, many audit reports only list the dependencies and note observed risks or notable characteristics, rather than making strong security assertions about whether a dependency is “approved.” This distinction seems especially important for community-maintained or widely adopted third-party libraries, where an auditor may be comfortable documenting its usage without wanting to formally endorse the dependency. Some additional guidance or softer terminology here may better reflect an auditor's dependency analysis.

        "Must notify of major changes"
      ],
      "reviewed_by": "string",
      "decision_notes": "string"
    }
  ]
}
```

## Motivation

As Daml applications and wallets proliferate in the Canton ecosystem, WalletProviders face a critical challenge: how to safely integrate third-party packages while maintaining security standards. Currently:

1. Each WalletProvider must either audit packages independently (expensive and duplicative) or trust AppProviders without verification (risky)
2. Security audits lack standardization, making it difficult to compare results across different auditors
3. There is no transparent way for audits to be discovered and verified
4. Audit results cannot be reused across multiple WalletProviders, leading to wasted effort

This CIP solves these problems by establishing a transparent, standardized ecosystem where:

- AppProviders clearly communicate what they're publishing and how it was built
- SecurityAuditors can publish results in verifiable repositories
- WalletProviders can discover and verify audits without conducting redundant validations
- All parties operate with cryptographic verification and transparency

> 

Reviewer 2: @davidrichards-da: note that version hell should go away with packages moving away from depending on other app's templates directly and only compose via interfaces.

<pre>
  CIP: CIP 0106
* Layer: Daml
  Title: Standard Package Validation and Distribution for Daml Applications
  Author: 
* Discussions-To: 
* Comments-Summary: 
* Comments-URI: 
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2026-02-27
  License: CC0-1.0
* License-Code: CC0-1.0
* Post-History: 
* Requires: 
</pre>

## Abstract

> This CIP proposes a standardized protocol for secure interaction between three parties in the Daml application ecosystem: **App Providers**, **Validator Node Providers**, and **Security Auditors**. The standard defines how App Providers publish Daml packages (.dar files) with cryptographically verifiable build metadata, how they request security audits from independent Security Auditors, and how Validator Node Providers can discover and verify audit results to make informed security decisions before integrating third-party packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This CIP proposes a standardized protocol for secure interaction between three parties in the Daml application ecosystem: **App Providers**, **Validator Node Providers**, and **Security Auditors**. The standard defines how App Providers publish Daml packages (.dar files) with cryptographically verifiable build metadata, how they request security audits from independent Security Auditors, and how Validator Node Providers can discover and verify audit results to make informed security decisions before deploying third-party packages on their nodes.
```

The protocol establishes transparent, Git-based publication channels for both App Provider packages and audit results, enabling Validator Node Providers to establish trust through verifiable security validations without requiring direct auditing capabilities.

## Specification

This CIP proposes a standardized protocol with three main components:

1. **Package Publication Standard**: App Providers publish Daml packages with structured metadata
2. **Audit Request and Response Protocol**: Standardized communication between App Providers and auditors
3. **Audit Result Publication**: Security Auditors and Validator Node Providers publish audit results in verifiable Git repositories

### Overview

#### Parties

- **App Provider**: An organization or individual developing Daml applications and publishing Daml packages (.dar files)
- **Validator Node Provider**: A service provider providing users with access to a Canton Network validator node hosting their parties.
- **Security Auditor**: An independent security firm or team validating the security properties of Daml packages

#### Problem Statement

> 

Reviewer 2: To me the core problem is how to ensure that:
1. app users can safely use all the applications they would like to use
2. app providers can easily roll-out upgrades to their applications

We can the observe that validator node operators take the role of shielding app users from the technical challenge of determining what app upgrades to accept when. And for validator node operators to do that efficiently and effectively, they need information from both app providers and security auditors.

So with that perspective, I'd suggest:
1. add "app user" to the parties list above
2. review the list of properties below, as to whether they are really required for validator node operators to make good decisions as to what apps and app upgrades to deploy on their nodes.

As the Daml ecosystem grows, Validator Node Providers need a reliable mechanism to:
1. Discover what security validations have been performed on third-party packages
2. Verify the integrity and authenticity of security audit reports
3. Make informed decisions about package integration based on transparent audit results
4. Establish trust without performing redundant security validations
5. Understand version compatibility between composed applications

App Providers benefit from:
1. Clear specification of what information to provide for auditing
2. Decentralized publication of audit results

> 3. Reuse of existing audits across multiple Validator Node Providers

Reviewer 2: I'm missing the aspect of low friction roll-out of apps and their upgrades to a wide user-base here. To me that's the most important aspect.

### Component 1: Package Publication Standard

#### App Provider Git Repository Structure

Each App Provider maintains a public or private Git repository with the following structure:

```
app-provider-repo/
├── README.md
├── apps/

> │   ├── canton-coin/

Reviewer 2: This seems like an example, but above it reads like this is mandatory structure.

│   │       ├── devnet.json
│   │       └── testnet.json
│   └── global-sync-governance/
│       ├── packages/
│       │   └── splice-dso-governance-0.1.22_5c28530209b9ab37c5f187132cd826709bb18b0efe28411488ab750870414738/
│       │       ├── package.dar
│       │       ├── metadata.json
│       │       ├── audit-reports.json
│       │       └── build-config.json
│       └── vetting-states/
│           ├── mainnet.json
│           ├── devnet.json
│           └── testnet.json
```

**Note on Directory Naming**: Directories under `packages/` must use the full package name, version, and an underscore-prefixed package hash (e.g., `package-name-1.2.3_hash`). This ensures uniqueness and avoids conflicts.

#### Package Metadata Format

The `metadata.json` file for each package version follows this JSON schema:

```json
{
  "schema_version": "1.0",
  "package_id": "string",
  "package_name": "string",
  "version": "string",
  "release_date": "2026-02-27T00:00:00Z",
  "description": "string",
  "publisher": {
    "name": "string",
    "email": "string",
    "organization": "string",
    "public_key_id": "string",
    "repository_url": "https://github.com/org/repo"
  },

>   "package_hash": {

Reviewer 2: is this the hash of the .dar file or the package-id of the .dalf files in there?

    "algorithm": "sha256",
    "value": "hex-encoded-hash"
  },
  "file_size_bytes": 12345,
  "dependencies": [
    {
      "package_id": "string",
      "package_name": "string",
      "version": "string",
      "package_hash": {
        "algorithm": "sha256",
        "value": "hex-encoded-hash"
      }
    }
  ],
  "build_reproducibility": {
    "daml_sdk_version": "3.3.0",
    "ghc_version": "9.2.4",
    "build_timestamp": "2026-02-27T00:00:00Z",
    "build_parameters": {
      "optimization_level": "release",
      "additional_flags": ["--ghc-option=-O2"]
    },
    "build_instructions_url": "https://github.com/org/repo/blob/main/BUILD.md#v1.0.0"

>   },

Reviewer 2: Ideally, this is encoded in the .dar file itself.

@paulbrauner-da: what's the status of being able to recompile a .dar to check its source to content mapping?

  "security_properties": {
    "daml_stdlib_version": "3.3.0",
    "notable_modules": [
      {
        "module_name": "App.Security.Authorization",
        "description": "Custom authorization logic"
      }

>     ]

Reviewer 2: Why do we need this section?

  },
  "licenses": {
    "package_license": "Apache-2.0",
    "dependency_licenses": [
      {
        "package_name": "string",
        "license": "Apache-2.0"
      }
    ]

>   },

Reviewer 2: This is part of the .dar AFAIK. Do we need it here?

  "contact": {
    "security_email": "security@example.com",
    "support_url": "https://example.com/support"
  }
}
```

##### Security Properties Definitions

- **`daml_stdlib_version`**: The version of the Daml Standard Library used to compile the package.
- **`notable_modules`**: A list of modules that are particularly important for security review (e.g., core business logic, authorization modules).

> #### Build Configuration Format

Reviewer 2: Let's see that we can move this out of this CIP into a feature of .dar files themselves.

  },
  "ghc_version": "9.2.4",
  "environment": {
    "os": "linux",
    "os_version": "Ubuntu 22.04",
    "architecture": "x86_64"
  },
  "source_hash": {
    "algorithm": "sha256",
    "value": "hex-encoded-hash-of-source-tree"
  },
  "build_script": "daml build --output package.dar",
  "build_flags": {
    "optimize": true,
    "enable_tests": true,
    "additional_options": []
  },
  "verification_instructions": "https://github.com/org/repo/blob/main/REPRODUCIBLE_BUILD.md",
  "build_artifacts_hash": {
    "algorithm": "sha256",
    "value": "hex-encoded-hash"
  }
}
```

#### Package Audit Reports

The `audit-reports.json` file in each package directory summarizes available audits:

```json
{
  "schema_version": "1.0",
  "package_id": "splice-amulet",
  "package_version": "0.1.16",
  "package_hash": {
    "algorithm": "sha256",
    "value": "c208d7ead1e4e9b610fc2054d0bf00716144ad444011bce0b02dcd6cd0cb8a23"
  },
  "audit_results": [
    {
      "auditor_name": "Security Auditor Company",
      "audit_date": "2026-02-20T00:00:00Z",
      "audit_report_url": "https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports/blob/main/reports/app-provider-name/1.0.0/audit-report.json",

>       "audit_status": "passed",

Reviewer 2: Might come later: I think we need a basic security definition here: the key aspect is that a package does not abuse the user's authority in the contracts to which the user delegated the authority.

      "severity_rating": "none",
      "expiration_date": "2027-02-27T00:00:00Z"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Vetting States Format

The `vetting-states/` directory contains JSON files (e.g., `mainnet.json`, `testnet.json`) that define the desired vetting state for the application on a specific network. This allows App Providers to communicate which package versions should be vetted or unvetted as part of a single application update.

```json
{
  "schema_version": "1.0",
  "app_name": "canton-coin",
  "network": "mainnet",
  "last_updated": "2026-03-01T10:00:00Z",
  "vetting_state": {
    "vet": [
      {
        "package_id": "splice-amulet",
        "package_version": "0.1.16",
        "package_hash": {
          "algorithm": "sha256",
          "value": "c208d7ead1e4e9b610fc2054d0bf00716144ad444011bce0b02dcd6cd0cb8a23"
        }
      },
      {
        "package_id": "splice-util",
        "package_version": "0.1.5",
        "package_hash": {
          "algorithm": "sha256",
          "value": "5a58024e2cc488ca9e0c952ec7ef41da3a1ed0a78ba23bacd819e5b30afb5546"

>         }

Reviewer 2: let's add an example with effective dating

      }
    ],
    "unvet": [
      {
        "package_id": "splice-amulet",
        "package_version": "0.1.15",
        "package_hash": {
          "algorithm": "sha256",
          "value": "..."
        }

>       }

Reviewer 2: The common case I see is to: unvet all packages with the "splice-amulet" name, and then vet the specific ones that should be active.

  },
  "reproducibility_verification": {
    "build_reproducible": true,
    "verification_status": "verified|failed|not_attempted",
    "verification_notes": "string",
    "reproduction_instructions_url": "https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports/blob/main/reports/app-provider/1.0.0/reproducibility.md"
  },
  "compliance_checklist": {
    "daml_best_practices": true,
    "authorization_implemented": true,
    "party_confidentiality_maintained": true,
    "contract_invariants_preserved": true,
    "no_known_vulnerabilities": true,
    "dependencies_vetted": true
  },
  "validity": {
    "issued_date": "2026-02-26T00:00:00Z",
    "expiration_date": "2027-02-26T00:00:00Z",
    "audit_is_valid": true,
    "validity_notes": "string"
  },
  "signature": {
    "algorithm": "rsa-sha256|ecdsa-sha256",
    "public_key_id": "string",
    "signature_value": "hex-encoded-signature"
  },
  "additional_resources": {
    "detailed_findings_url": "https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports/blob/main/reports/app-provider/1.0.0/detailed-findings.md",
    "evidence_artifacts_url": "https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports/tree/main/reports/app-provider/1.0.0/evidence"
  }

> }

Reviewer 2: This is a lot of data. I'm not convinced that we need all of this for the purpose of making it easy for apps to get deployed on validator nodes.

I'd suggest we focus on the minimal properties that make it safe for a user to engage with an app.

```

#### Security Auditor Index File

> Each auditor maintains an `index.json` for discoverability:

Reviewer 2: Can you explain how this would be used by validator node operators to make their decision on whether to deploy an app (ugprade)?

    "name": "string",
    "organization": "string",
    "website": "https://example.com",
    "repository_url": "https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports",
    "contact_email": "audits@example.com"
  },
  "auditor_profile": {
    "daml_expertise_level": "expert|advanced|intermediate",
    "certifications": ["string"],
    "years_in_security": 10,
    "audit_methodology_url": "https://example.com/methodology"
  },
  "audit_statistics": {
    "total_audits_completed": 50,
    "packages_audited": 45,
    "audits_passed": 40,
    "audits_with_findings": 5,
    "audits_failed": 0
  },
  "recent_audits": [
    {
      "package_name": "string",
      "version": "string",
      "app_provider": "string",
      "audit_date": "2026-02-26T00:00:00Z",
      "status": "passed",
      "report_url": "https://github.com/auditor/audit-reports/blob/main/reports/app-provider/1.0.0/audit-report.json"
    }
  ]
}
```

### Component 4: Validator Node Provider Validation Process

#### Validator Node Provider Verification Procedure

Validator Node Providers implement the following process before integrating a third-party package:

```json
{
  "schema_version": "1.0",
  "verification_process": {

>     "step_1_locate_package": {

Reviewer 2: Why are these steps described as JSON? I'd have expected them to be addressed to humans...

      "method": "Query audit-reports.json from the versioned package directory and fetch reports from referenced URLs"
    },
    "step_3_verify_audit_integrity": {
      "description": "Verify audit report signatures and validity",
      "checks": [
        "Report signature verifies against auditor's public key",
        "Audit is within validity period",
        "Package hash in audit matches actual package"
      ]
    },
    "step_4_assess_audit_results": {
      "description": "Analyze findings and make integration decision",
      "decision_matrix": {
        "status_passed_no_findings": "safe_for_integration",
        "status_passed_low_findings": "safe_with_monitoring",
        "status_passed_medium_findings": "requires_remediation_agreement",
        "status_failed": "do_not_integrate"
      }
    },
    "step_5_internal_verification": {
      "description": "Optional: perform own validation or use trusted auditor results",
      "options": [
        "self_audit",
        "trust_single_auditor",
        "require_multiple_audits",
        "combine_internal_and_external"
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

#### Validator Node Provider Integration Decision Document

> Validator Node Providers maintain records of their integration decisions:

Reviewer 2: Why? They may do so, but do they need to do so?

- **Audit Request**: `schemas/audit-request.schema.json`
- **Security Audit Report**: `schemas/audit-report.schema.json`
- **Security Auditor Index**: `schemas/auditor-index.schema.json`
- **Verification Procedure**: `schemas/verification-procedure.schema.json`
- **Integration Decision Document**: `schemas/integration-decision.schema.json`

## Motivation

As Daml applications and validator nodes proliferate in the Canton ecosystem, Validator Node Providers face a critical challenge: how to safely integrate third-party packages while maintaining security standards. Currently:

1. Each Validator Node Provider must either audit packages independently (expensive and duplicative) or trust App Providers without verification (risky)
2. Security audits lack standardization, making it difficult to compare results across different auditors
3. There is no transparent way for audits to be discovered and verified
4. Audit results cannot be reused across multiple Validator Node Providers, leading to wasted effort

This CIP solves these problems by establishing a transparent, standardized ecosystem where:

- App Providers clearly communicate what they're publishing and how it was built

> - Security Auditors can publish results in verifiable repositories

Reviewer 2: In what sense are the repositories "verifiable"?

- Validator Node Providers can discover and verify audits without conducting redundant validations

> - All parties operate with cryptographic verification and transparency

Reviewer 2: I see hashes being used, but no signatures. Do we need code-signing to guard against compromise of the GH repos?

**Security Risks and Malicious Code**

Node operators are highly concerned about uploading malicious DAR files. There are two primary concerns here:

1. Risk to their validator and environment: They fear potential exploits and the risk that a DAR could break their validator. 

2. Risk to their end-users: unknowingly signing malicious transactions.
Node operators also want to ensure that source code which has been vetted equates exactly to the DAR files uploaded to their nodes.

**Version Control, Composability & Operational Overhead**
There is anxiety surrounding the continual maintenance and testing required for initial DARs and subsequent new versions. Providers specifically called out "version hell", the sparse matrix of version compatibility for composability, and how dependencies are handled and enforced.
Providers are concerned about the operational effort required to load DARs onto validators. They’d like this as automated as possible.

## Rationale

### Design Decisions

#### Why Git-based Publishing

Git provides:

> - **Cryptographic verification** via commit signatures

Reviewer 2: Who verifies these signatures and where does this verification happen?

- Authentication adds operational complexity for auditors
- Validator node software would need credential management
- Decentralized auditors may not have unified authentication

#### Single Standardized Audit Template

We provide flexibility in audit findings because:
- Different auditors have different expertise and methodologies
- Findings should be tailored to the package's specific risks
- Overly rigid templates lead to lower quality audits
- Standard provides sufficient structure (schema) while allowing content flexibility

## Backwards Compatibility

This is a new standard introducing no backwards compatibility concerns. All participants can adopt it incrementally:

- App Providers can begin publishing metadata without affecting existing processes
- Security Auditors can start using the standard format for new audits
- Validator Node Providers can adopt verification procedures at their own pace

Existing packages without audits remain usable; Validator Node Providers simply cannot leverage audit information for integration decisions.

## Implementation

An implementation of this standard should include:

1. **App Provider tooling**:

>    - CLI tool to generate `metadata.json` and `build-config.json` from .dar files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
As written above, I believe build reproducibility is better solved by changing `dpm` to check the sources of a .dar matching its contents.

So I'm not sure about this tool being built.

However, a tool that does seem useful is one that generates a target vetting state from a set of .dars

   - Validation scripts to verify JSON schema compliance
   - Documentation for setting up audit requests

2. **Security Auditor tooling**:
   - Templates for `audit-report.json` generation
   - Signature generation and verification utilities
   - Batch reporting tools for multiple packages

3. **Validator Node Provider tooling**:
   - Library to fetch and verify audit reports

>    - Decision engine implementing verification procedures

Reviewer 2: Is this the script that computes the target vetting state for their validator nodes from a spec of the apps that they would like to deploy and the security audit reports to use?

>    - UI components for displaying audit results to users

Reviewer 2: Why do they need to publish this to users?
